dh_python2.rst, before:

============
 dh_python2
============

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
calculates Python dependencies, adds maintainer scripts to byte compile files, etc.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SYNOPSIS
========
  dh_python2 -p PACKAGE [-V [X.Y][-][A.B]] DIR_OR_FILE [-X REGEXPR]

DESCRIPTION
===========

QUICK GUIDE FOR MAINTAINERS
---------------------------

 * if necessary, describe supported Python versions via X-Python-Version field
   in debian/control,
 * build-depend on python or python-all or python-all-dev (>= 2.6.6-3~),
 * build module/application using its standard build system,
   remember to build extensions for all supported Python versions (loop over
   ``pyversions -vr``),
 * install files to the *standard* locations, add ``--install-layout=deb`` to
   setup.py's install command if your package is using distutils,
 * add ``python2`` to dh's ``--with`` option, or:
 * include /usr/share/cdbs/1/class/python-distutils.mk in debian/rules and
   depend on cdbs (>= 0.4.90-1~), or:
 * call dh_python2 in the binary-* target,
 * add ${python:Depends} to Depends,

NOTES
-----

In order to support more than one Python version in the same binary package,
dh_python2 (unlike dh_pycentral and dh_pysupport) creates symlinks to all
supported Python versions at build time. It means binNMU (or sourceful upload
in case of architecture independent packages) is required once a list of
supported Python version is changed. It's faster and more robust than its
competitors, though.

dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~
dh_python2 tries to translate Python dependencies from requires.txt file to
Debian dependencies, use debian/pydist-overrides or --no-guessing-deps option
to override it. If you want dh_python2 to generate more strict dependencies
(f.e. to avoid ABI problems) create debian/python-foo.pydist file. See
/usr/share/doc/python-doc/README.PyDist (provided by python-doc package) for
more information.

namespace feature
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
dh_python2 parses Egg's namespace_packages.txt files (in addition to
--namespace command line argument(s)) and drops empty __init__.py files from
binary package. pycompile will regenerates them at install time and pyclean
will remove them at uninstall time (if they're no longer used in installed
packages). It's still a good idea to provide __init__.py file in one of
binary packages (even if all other packages use this feature).

private dirs
~~~~~~~~~~~~
`/usr/share/foo`, `/usr/share/games/foo`, `/usr/lib/foo` and
`/usr/lib/games/foo` private directories are scanned for Python files
by default (where `foo` is binary package name). If your package is shipping
Python files in some other directory, add another dh_python2 call in
debian/rules with directory name as an argument - you can use different set of
options in this call. If you need to change options (f.e. a list of supported
Python versions) for a private directory that is checked by default, invoke
dh_python2 with --skip-private option and add another call with a path to this
directory and new options.

pyinstall files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Files listed in debian/pkg.pyinstall file will be installed as public modules
for all requested Python versions (dh_install doesn't know about python's site-
vs. dist-packages issue).

Syntax: "path/to/file [VERSION_RANGE] [NAMESPACE]". debian directory is
automatically removed from the path, so you can place your files in debian/
directory and install them from this location (if you want to install them in
"debian" namespace, set NAMESPACE to debian). If NAMESPACE is set, all listed
files will be installed in .../dist-packages/NAMESPACE/ directory.

Examples:
 * `foo.py` (installs .../dist-packages/foo.py for all supported Python versions)
 * `foo/bar.py 2.6-` (installs .../dist-packages/foo/bar.py for versions >= 2.6)
 * `foo/bar.py spam` (installs .../dist-packages/spam/bar.py)
 * `debian/*.py spam.egg 2.5` (installs .../python2.5/site-packages/spam/egg/\*.py
   files)

pyremove files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you want to remove some files installed by build system (from all supported
Python versions or only from a subset of these versions), add them to
debian/pkg.pyremove file.

Examples:
 * `*.pth` (removes .pth files from .../dist-packages/)
 * `bar/baz.py 2.5` (removes .../python2.5/site-packages/bar/baz.py)


OPTIONS
=======
--version	show program's version number and exit

-h, --help	show help message and exit

--no-guessing-versions	disable guessing other supported Python versions

--no-guessing-deps	disable guessing dependencies

--skip-private	don't check private directories

-v, --verbose	turn verbose mode on

-i, --indep	act on architecture independent packages

-a, --arch	act on architecture dependent packages

-q, --quiet	be quiet

-p PACKAGE, --package=PACKAGE	act on the package named PACKAGE

-N NO_PACKAGE, --no-package=NO_PACKAGE	do not act on the specified package

-V VRANGE	specify list of supported Python versions. See
  pycompile(1) for examples

-X REGEXPR, --exclude=REGEXPR	exclude items that match given REGEXPR. You may
  use this option multiple times to build up a list of things to exclude.

--depends=DEPENDS	translate given requirements into Debian dependencies
  and add them to ${python:Depends}. Use it for missing items in requires.txt

--recommends=RECOMMENDS		translate given requirements into Debian dependencies
  and add them to ${python:Recommends}

--suggests=SUGGESTS	translate given requirements into Debian dependencies
  and add them to ${python:Suggests}

--namespace	use this option (multiple time if necessary) if
  namespace_packages.txt is not complete

--ignore-namespace	ignore Egg's namespace declaration and
  --namespace option. This option will disable removing (and recreating at
  install time) empty __init__.py files. Removing namespace_packages.txt from
  egg-info directory has the same effect.

--clean-pycentral	generate maintainer script that will remove byte code
  generated by python-central helper

--ignore-shebangs	do not translate shebangs into Debian dependencies

SEE ALSO
========
* /usr/share/doc/python/python-policy.txt.gz
* /usr/share/doc/python-doc/README.PyDist (python-doc package)
* pycompile(1), pyclean(1)
* dh_python3(1), py3compile(1), py3clean(1)
* Wiki pages about converting package to dh_python2:
  http://wiki.debian.org/Python/PythonSupportToDHPython2
  http://wiki.debian.org/Python/PyCentral2DhPython2

Commit message:

* dh_python2:   - generates rtupdate scripts for private directories that compile files     from given package only, add --compile-all to dh_python2's call if you     want the old behaviour (i.e. compile also files (plugins?) provided by     other packages, which do not use a helper/bytecompile them) * pyclean now accepts --package and private dir argument at the same time

dh_python2.rst, after:

============
 dh_python2
============

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
calculates Python dependencies, adds maintainer scripts to byte compile files, etc.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

SYNOPSIS
========
  dh_python2 -p PACKAGE [-V [X.Y][-][A.B]] DIR_OR_FILE [-X REGEXPR]

DESCRIPTION
===========

QUICK GUIDE FOR MAINTAINERS
---------------------------

 * if necessary, describe supported Python versions via X-Python-Version field
   in debian/control,
 * build-depend on python or python-all or python-all-dev (>= 2.6.6-3~),
 * build module/application using its standard build system,
   remember to build extensions for all supported Python versions (loop over
   ``pyversions -vr``),
 * install files to the *standard* locations, add ``--install-layout=deb`` to
   setup.py's install command if your package is using distutils,
 * add ``python2`` to dh's ``--with`` option, or:
 * include /usr/share/cdbs/1/class/python-distutils.mk in debian/rules and
   depend on cdbs (>= 0.4.90-1~), or:
 * call dh_python2 in the binary-* target,
 * add ${python:Depends} to Depends,

NOTES
-----

In order to support more than one Python version in the same binary package,
dh_python2 (unlike dh_pycentral and dh_pysupport) creates symlinks to all
supported Python versions at build time. It means binNMU (or sourceful upload
in case of architecture independent packages) is required once a list of
supported Python version is changed. It's faster and more robust than its
competitors, though.

dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~
dh_python2 tries to translate Python dependencies from requires.txt file to
Debian dependencies, use debian/pydist-overrides or --no-guessing-deps option
to override it. If you want dh_python2 to generate more strict dependencies
(f.e. to avoid ABI problems) create debian/python-foo.pydist file. See
/usr/share/doc/python-doc/README.PyDist (provided by python-doc package) for
more information.

namespace feature
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
dh_python2 parses Egg's namespace_packages.txt files (in addition to
--namespace command line argument(s)) and drops empty __init__.py files from
binary package. pycompile will regenerates them at install time and pyclean
will remove them at uninstall time (if they're no longer used in installed
packages). It's still a good idea to provide __init__.py file in one of
binary packages (even if all other packages use this feature).

private dirs
~~~~~~~~~~~~
`/usr/share/foo`, `/usr/share/games/foo`, `/usr/lib/foo` and
`/usr/lib/games/foo` private directories are scanned for Python files
by default (where `foo` is binary package name). If your package is shipping
Python files in some other directory, add another dh_python2 call in
debian/rules with directory name as an argument - you can use different set of
options in this call. If you need to change options (f.e. a list of supported
Python versions) for a private directory that is checked by default, invoke
dh_python2 with --skip-private option and add another call with a path to this
directory and new options.

pyinstall files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Files listed in debian/pkg.pyinstall file will be installed as public modules
for all requested Python versions (dh_install doesn't know about python's site-
vs. dist-packages issue).

Syntax: "path/to/file [VERSION_RANGE] [NAMESPACE]". debian directory is
automatically removed from the path, so you can place your files in debian/
directory and install them from this location (if you want to install them in
"debian" namespace, set NAMESPACE to debian). If NAMESPACE is set, all listed
files will be installed in .../dist-packages/NAMESPACE/ directory.

Examples:
 * `foo.py` (installs .../dist-packages/foo.py for all supported Python versions)
 * `foo/bar.py 2.6-` (installs .../dist-packages/foo/bar.py for versions >= 2.6)
 * `foo/bar.py spam` (installs .../dist-packages/spam/bar.py)
 * `debian/*.py spam.egg 2.5` (installs .../python2.5/site-packages/spam/egg/\*.py
   files)

pyremove files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
If you want to remove some files installed by build system (from all supported
Python versions or only from a subset of these versions), add them to
debian/pkg.pyremove file.

Examples:
 * `*.pth` (removes .pth files from .../dist-packages/)
 * `bar/baz.py 2.5` (removes .../python2.5/site-packages/bar/baz.py)


OPTIONS
=======
--version	show program's version number and exit

-h, --help	show help message and exit

--no-guessing-versions	disable guessing other supported Python versions

--no-guessing-deps	disable guessing dependencies

--skip-private	don't check private directories

-v, --verbose	turn verbose mode on

-i, --indep	act on architecture independent packages

-a, --arch	act on architecture dependent packages

-q, --quiet	be quiet

-p PACKAGE, --package=PACKAGE	act on the package named PACKAGE

-N NO_PACKAGE, --no-package=NO_PACKAGE	do not act on the specified package

-V VRANGE	specify list of supported Python versions. See
  pycompile(1) for examples

-X REGEXPR, --exclude=REGEXPR	exclude items that match given REGEXPR. You may
  use this option multiple times to build up a list of things to exclude.

--compile-all	compile all files from given private directory in postinst/rtupdate
  not just the ones provided by the package (i.e. do not pass the --package
  parameter to pycompile/pyclean)

--depends=DEPENDS	translate given requirements into Debian dependencies
  and add them to ${python:Depends}. Use it for missing items in requires.txt

--recommends=RECOMMENDS		translate given requirements into Debian dependencies
  and add them to ${python:Recommends}

--suggests=SUGGESTS	translate given requirements into Debian dependencies
  and add them to ${python:Suggests}

--namespace	use this option (multiple time if necessary) if
  namespace_packages.txt is not complete

--ignore-namespace	ignore Egg's namespace declaration and
  --namespace option. This option will disable removing (and recreating at
  install time) empty __init__.py files. Removing namespace_packages.txt from
  egg-info directory has the same effect.

--clean-pycentral	generate maintainer script that will remove byte code
  generated by python-central helper

--ignore-shebangs	do not translate shebangs into Debian dependencies

SEE ALSO
========
* /usr/share/doc/python/python-policy.txt.gz
* /usr/share/doc/python-doc/README.PyDist (python-doc package)
* pycompile(1), pyclean(1)
* dh_python3(1), py3compile(1), py3clean(1)
* Wiki pages about converting package to dh_python2:
  http://wiki.debian.org/Python/PythonSupportToDHPython2
  http://wiki.debian.org/Python/PyCentral2DhPython2
