pycompile.rst, before:

==========
 pycompile
==========

--------------------------------
byte compile Python source files
--------------------------------

:Manual section: 1
:Author: Piotr Ożarowski, 2012-2013

SYNOPSIS
========
  pycompile [-V [X.Y][-][A.B]] DIR_OR_FILE [-X REGEXPR]

  pycompile -p PACKAGE

DESCRIPTION
===========
Wrapper around Python standard library's py_compile module to byte-compile
Python files.

OPTIONS
=======
--version	show program's version number and exit

-h, --help	show this help message and exit

-f, --force	force rebuild of byte-code files even if timestamps are up-to-date

-O		byte-compile to .pyo files

-q, --quiet	be quiet

-v, --verbose	turn verbose mode on

-p PACKAGE, --package=PACKAGE	specify Debian package name whose files should
  be bytecompiled

-V VRANGE	force private modules to be bytecompiled with Python
  version from given range, regardless of the default Python version in the
  system. If there are no other options, bytecompile all public modules
  for installed Python versions that match given range. VERSION_RANGE examples:

   * ``2.5``	version 2.5 only
   * ``2.5-``	version 2.5 or newer
   * ``2.5-2.7``	version 2.5 or 2.6
   * ``-3.0``	all supported 2.X versions

-X REGEXPR, --exclude=REGEXPR	exclude items that match given REGEXPR. You may
  use this option multiple times to build up a list of things to exclude

Commit message:

pyc{ompile,lean}.rst: add a note about combining with DIR_OF_FILE

pycompile.rst, after:

==========
 pycompile
==========

--------------------------------
byte compile Python source files
--------------------------------

:Manual section: 1
:Author: Piotr Ożarowski, 2012-2013

SYNOPSIS
========
  pycompile [-V [X.Y][-][A.B]] DIR_OR_FILE [-X REGEXPR]

  pycompile -p PACKAGE

DESCRIPTION
===========
Wrapper around Python standard library's py_compile module to byte-compile
Python files.

OPTIONS
=======
--version	show program's version number and exit

-h, --help	show this help message and exit

-f, --force	force rebuild of byte-code files even if timestamps are up-to-date

-O		byte-compile to .pyo files

-q, --quiet	be quiet

-v, --verbose	turn verbose mode on

-p PACKAGE, --package=PACKAGE	specify Debian package name whose files should
  be bytecompiled (combining with DIR_OR_FILE will additionally limit list of
  files)

-V VRANGE	force private modules to be bytecompiled with Python
  version from given range, regardless of the default Python version in the
  system. If there are no other options, bytecompile all public modules
  for installed Python versions that match given range. VERSION_RANGE examples:

   * ``2.5``	version 2.5 only
   * ``2.5-``	version 2.5 or newer
   * ``2.5-2.7``	version 2.5 or 2.6
   * ``-3.0``	all supported 2.X versions

-X REGEXPR, --exclude=REGEXPR	exclude items that match given REGEXPR. You may
  use this option multiple times to build up a list of things to exclude
